feat(key-manager): add a page explaining the difference between secret manager and key manager (#3648)
scaleway/docs-content: identity-and-access-management/key-manager/reference-content/differences-between-secret-manager-and-key-manager.mdx

---
meta:
  title: What is the difference between Key Manager and Secret Manager?
  description: Learn the differences between Key Manager and Secret Manager and which one to use according to your needs
content:
  h1: What is the difference between Key Manager and Secret Manager?
  paragraph: Learn the differences between Key Manager and Secret Manager and which one to use according to your needs
tags: key-manager secret-manager security
dates:
  validation: 2024-08-28
---

Secret Manager and Key Manager are both security-focused products aiming
to help you protect your data and improve the security of your
infrastructure.

> The difference between them is not always clear, and it is natural

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The difference between them is not always clear, and you may be
```

to ask which one you need according to your use-case.

This document helps you answer that question.

## Secret Manager

The Secret Manager stores various secrets that your applications wants to
access at some point. For example, when your application needs to call
an external API service or connect to a database, it fetches the API token
or the credentials from the Secret Manager before proceeding.

Secrets can be pretty much everything you want: API tokens,
credentials to connect to a database, sensible data.
There is no limitation, if not the size of the secrets.

## Key Manager

In contrast, Key Manager only stores cryptographic keys.

At first, the Key Manager seems to be just a restricted version of

> the Secret Manager, only for keys.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
the Secret Manager, for keys only.
```

It is indeed true that the Secret Manager could also store cryptographic keys

> and hand over the keys to applications that need to perform cryptographic operations.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
and hand them over to applications that need to perform cryptographic operations.
```

However, this approach is full of pitfalls and can lead to serious security problems:

>  - Inadvertently storing the keys in plaintext, or exposing them (<i>e.g.</i>, in logs)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
 - Inadvertently storing the keys in plaintext, or exposing them (e.g. in logs)
```

>  - Incorrect (re-)use of key: your application would be responsible to use the key correctly,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
 - Incorrect (re-)use of key: your application would be responsible for using the key correctly,
```

>    which is harder than it looks.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   which is harder than it first seems.
```

>  - Not disposing the key properly after use (<i>e.g.</i>, letting it reside in swap disk)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
 - Not disposing of the key properly after use (e.g. letting it reside in swap disk)
```

> They are typical key management problems, and the Secret Manager does not solve them

Reviewer: ```suggestion
These are typical key management problems, which are not effectively solved by Secret Manager
```

> effectively, hence the need of the Key Manager.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
, hence the need for Key Manager.
```

> The Key Manager simply does **not** gives you any key.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Key Manager does **not** simply give you any requested key.
```

> All keys residing in the Key Manager never (and never will) leave the Key Manager, since

Reviewer: ```suggestion
All keys residing in Key Manager never (and never will) leave Key Manager, since
```

there is no way to extract them by design.

> Since you cannot have the key, the Key Manager performs the cryptographic operations

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Since you cannot have the key, Key Manager performs the cryptographic operations
```

for you: your application supplies the plaintext to be encrypted, or
the ciphertext to be decrypted. That means your application is no longer

> responsible of managing the keys and using them properly, the Key Manager takes care of it.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
responsible for managing the keys and using them properly: Key Manager takes care of this.
```

> Last, but not least, the Key Manager provides another way of authorizing some actions.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Last, but not least, Key Manager provides another way of authorizing certain actions.
```

> You might want to authorize some principals to only encrypt data, and other

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You might want to authorize some principals only to encrypt data, and others
```

> principals to only decrypt data.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
only to decrypt data.
```

For example, imagine an application that receives

> some sensible health data that needs to be encrypted before being inserted into

Reviewer: ```suggestion
sensitive health data that needs to be encrypted before being inserted into
```

> a database. Such an application would have the privilege to ask the Key Manager

Reviewer: ```suggestion
a database. Such an application would be able to ask the Key Manager
```

> encryption operations, but not decryption opeartions, so it cannot read sensible

Reviewer: ```suggestion
to carry out encryption operations, but not decryption operations, so it cannot read the sensitive
```

data already stored.

This is not possible to achieve with Secret Manager, since both writing and reading
applications would need at least the privilege of reading the key from the Secret Manager,
which is sufficient to both encrypt and decrypt the data.

## Conclusion

> Cryptographic keys are secrets that need special care, and the Key Manager

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Cryptographic keys are secrets that need special care, and Key Manager
```

> is an effective tool to helps you manage them securely,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
is an effective tool to help you manage them securely,
```

> allowing your application to offload all the sensible cryptographic

Reviewer: ```suggestion
allowing your application to offload all sensitive cryptographic
```
